First, 1985, this is an interview with Norman Borlaug.
This is a test.
Testing.
This is an interview with Norman Borlaug.
Made an analysis of nutritional value, then?
This was done theoretically.
Dr. Ryan of Icarusat.
The International Institute in Hyderabad made an analysis and he found out that the total amount of protein produced per acre or hectare from the increased wheat yields when they were cultivated as they should have been was greater than the total amount of protein produced by the old two systems.
And that if per capita consumption went up of wheat, which has happened up to a certain point, this more than compensated for the displacement of pulses.
point on this is an entirely different one.
I say don't punish the fast runners.
Criticize the ones that are lagging behind.
Get the research people to hell working on grain, legumes, and pulses.
Don't handicap the people on wheat and rice that have done their job and have shown what's possible.
This is just a nice manipulation of words so that you have something to criticize.
But it's become increasingly also, more and more apparent in the last 10 years, that although there's some truth, well, there's not some truth, you have to have a certain level of protein in your diet, and it has to have a certain
balance of the essential amino acids that you can balance better by mixing in your diet, the grain legume and cereal, that now it's more and more clear that undernutrition, lack of enough calories overrides the protein per se.
It used to be thought even 15 years ago, 10 or 15 years ago, that many of the children, especially, were in such bad shape because of low protein intake.
But now the pendulum has swung the other way in nutrition, and they say, first of all, you've got to have enough calories.
And if there's enough calories going in, only rarely do you find the protein malnutrition.
It's there under certain conditions, and especially with very young children, because they don't have enough stomach capacity to take in enough so that they can balance their diets.
You know, the amino acids are a curious thing.
Are you familiar with the old barrel of different heights of staves that Liebig used to illustrate his law of the minimum?
The law of the minimum
was used to refer to what fertilizer or what nutrient was most limiting in yield, and he used to, when he opened up this whole field back in the 1840s, he used this term, the law of the minimum, and a barrel with staves cut at different levels.
The one that was
At the lowest level, no matter how much more nitrogen you put in, it all ran out at the height of that lower stave.
If that happened to be potash, you were wasting the additional nitrogen.
It so happens that our body works this way with essential amino acids.
Our body maintenance and growth
will be determined by the limitation of the least essential amino acid and the others that come in from other proteins will be sloughed off in the urine and the excreta.
So what you're saying here is if the nutriment value is less, that's not even important.
There may be cases with the very young where it is important, but the volume is the overriding thing in most places.
There isn't enough calories in the diet.
and reasonable levels of protein.
If you get enough calories, eat enough weight, or the new corns especially, this will be a big improvement in corn, because corn basically had lower nutritional value than wheat or than rice.
Let's go to another criticism, and some of these other criticisms
deal more with the social structure of developing country.
I'm sure that you've heard these before.
A guy by the name of Lester Brown has written some books, including Seeds of Change.
And Keith Griffin has written The Political Economy of Agricultural Change, an essay on the Green Revolution.
And these people come up with issues like what happened once you introduced these grains.
One of them is that the government supported, were supported, the governments of these countries were supported by wealthier farmers and that the government's concentrated on helping the larger, wealthier farmers with the new technology to continue developing the Green Revolution and not the poorer farmers.
And the result, of course, of that is people who
who were the smaller farmers couldn't compete with the larger farmers, the people who were the tenants ran off the land, some of the small farmers went under.
How would you respond to those?
Well, I think that this is a gross oversimplification.
For example, it's true in any society, U.S.,
that the innovators are generally the most, the best trained.
And if they see those new wheat varieties that are doing better in any kind of a government that has any part of the free enterprise system, they're likely to get a disproportionate early advantage.
But wheat is a crop that...
And as a result, I saw some outlandish prices for wheat, not after the big imports, but those early ones, like when we brought in these small samples, or even the year when we brought in the 300 tons with the bad germination and everything wrong.
Hell, this was being siphoned off into black markets after the harvest.
We had no control off it.
But even if they paid,
and outlined each price, the little farmer maybe bought a kilo, and the next year he planted it in his own plot, and the second year he had enough for his whole damn farm.
So maybe they lagged behind one or two years, but they got the benefits.
From the standpoint of fertilizer, one of the things that we argued and screamed about was credit for the fertilizer and to get the quantities up, to saturate the damn market.
and uh there's no those people that criticize like that what the hell have they ever done they've never been in the trenches they don't know how impossible it is to distribute things except with a pencil when you're out with hunger and misery and dealing with millions of people this
I detest these points of view because they have never lived what they are preaching.
I've been stupid enough to believe the so-called Green Revolution was to cure all of the social, economic, and political ills from the time of Adam and Eve up to 1967 or 68.
I would have been insane.
Apparently some of those people were naive enough to think that this was about to happen.
Actually, it was for self advancement and self promotion within their own field that they liked to write these learned articles.
That was for advancement
within their own field.
But what about their criticism?
I mean, I understand very, very well your position.
But what about the criticism?
And I understand also not only your position, but the fact that you were powerless to stop almost all of the social aspects of being a scientist.
And a foreigner.
that they raised.
The fact that the more educated farmers accept the change first, they're usually the wealthier farmers, they prosper, and then because they're producing more, prices go down and the poor farmer can't make it.
He's no better off economically than he was before.
That didn't happen.
Because the deficit was so big
That by the second and at the latest, the third year, everybody had the seed.
Everybody had it.
You mean the deficit and the amount of grain that they needed was so large that prices didn't go down.
You couldn't saturate the market for quite a few years.
And you need to remember this, that most of the change in production
was the result of the increase in yield on those two to five hectare farms.
That constitutes the great majority of the land ownership in India.
In Pakistan, it's different.
They have got too many big farmers still.
But in India, now, I'm not saying that there aren't some cover-up jobs where a guy that's
presumably got his own 20 hectares or 28, I guess, is the maximum amount of irrigated land.
Might not have a bunch of nephews or so on that's working on another plot, but he controls it.
But I can't waste my energies looking at that.
But the point is this, that where did most of that production come from?
It came from the little plots.
In other words, the vast majority of the people were participating in the main wheat region.
Now, the disparities came from this, and that's an act of God, not of man.
The areas with better rainfall or with irrigation in the best wheat-growing areas jumped their production like this.
These people out in the marginal deserts, they couldn't.
But those are disparities that were there from the beginning.
And to try to blame this onto the... So did the people... Yeah, I agree.
And the same is true for other crops that were stagnant, like these pulses.
And they shifted part of their area to wheat or to rice because it gave them more income.
If the oil seeds didn't move,
If somebody didn't do the research and the extension on the oil seeds,
You've got to start someplace.
You try to start on all the crops and you fail miserably.
You've got to make a breakthrough.
And then you start to point fingers.
Then you're in a position to be heard by the political leaders and by the directors of research.
You'll say, what in the hell is wrong with that mustard program?
It's got everything except one integrator that doesn't have the guts to put the pieces together.
All you need to do
is to do a little better research on finding out when to apply one or at the most two treatments of insecticide to cut back on the damage of aphids and you will increase your production of mustard oil three or fourfold.
They still haven't done it.
But you can't move all of those things.
Do you understand what I mean?
Yes, yes.
Well, what about... And so the best I could ever do was to show what the hell you can do on wheat.
And then the same thing started to come on rice.
And then many of the farmers became wheat and rice, two in the same rotation for the same year.
One of the other things, the biggest indirect benefits that came when we introduced wheat, the new technology of wheat production, let's say in the Punjab,
and in certain other areas, Arianna and Delhi State and Western UP, the farmer would see the response to fertilizer.
If the research hadn't been done on fertilizer for other crops, he'd say, oh my God, look what that did.
So he'll start fertilizing, maybe inefficiently, but this opens the door and you can stick the guy in the stomach that's supposed to be doing the fertilizer on other crops because that farmer's already starting to fertilize.
And it starts a whole series of reactions.
And so probably the double cropping on the same land, which was not possible before you began to use fertilizer, because the farmer had learned long ago that water was not the limiting factor, and he had to leave that land rest in fallow, weed fallow.
from the time he harvested his weeds until he planted the next November and December.
They used to call it leave at rest, fallow, so that there would be some liberation of nitrates by the decomposition of straw and roots and these sorts of things.
So you've got to move it all together.
Now, just to show you that there are scoundrels around and
For example, I suppose in 68 or 69 probably, the early weeks we introduced were semi-dwarf and one of them was a double dwarf, shorter.
But we were experimenting with some very short ones.
We called them triple dwarfs.
They looked very good on the experiment station in Delhi and UP and Ludhiana and Punjab.
But I wasn't convinced that they didn't have problems.
And I said to Anderson, let's get him onto two or three farms.
Well, so they put not just that very short one, but some of the other most promising ones in little plots on the farmer's field where they rented the land.
Of course, you always have to put watchmen out there as these
approach getting ripe, both from the standpoint of animals, but also thievery.
And apparently that very short one, you know, the dwarf wheats with all of the change in yields created just tremendous enthusiasm.
When the wheat was about ripe,
They came out one day and they found, in the morning, they found a guard tied up to a tree and somebody had taken all his clothes off and tied them up to a tree and cut that whole damn plot and carried it off in the night.
Fortunately, it didn't.
It wasn't as good as the taller ones.
because of weed control, but this shows how these things go.
This shows the psychology of change.
And this demonstrates also the difference between being a hands-on scientist and one in an air-conditioned office.
Damn right.
Let's get to this.
Where are the other criticisms?
Okay, we're going to get to those.
So, no one should have expected us to correct all the social, economic, and political ills from the time of Adam and Eve up to 1960.
Well, I've got some more for you, too.
Okay.
Griffin, Keith Griffin says, when he's talking about the credit system, he's saying that the problem with the Great Revolution is that in Pakistan, the farm loan system in Pakistan gave loans to farmers
who had a minimum of 12 to 25 acres, which is a fairly good-sized plot.
And by doing that, that excluded 80% of the farmers in Pakistan.
In other words, the farm loan system was giving credit to the wealthier farmers, the larger farmers, but not to 80% of them, which were the poorer farmers.
Well, what's the date on that?
Do you have the date?
No, I don't.
You will recall, I've already made the mention that the difference in land ownership in Pakistan is quite different than India.
And there are still today some very large landowners in Pakistan.
And as a matter of fact, you may recall that Bhutto came in when he was president and during his campaign, one of his...
political pitches was to redistribute the land, which he did in part, but he didn't distribute any of his own land and he was one of the largest landowners.
How much that had to do with what happened to him subsequently, if you recall, he faced a firing squad, or I guess, yeah, I guess that's the way he was executed.
That was really after the period when this thing had moved into big scale production.
I don't doubt what there were inequities in distribution of credit.
And again, I say it's very nice to criticize.
The question is from you, what power do you have?
I don't have any power except to discuss with the political leaders, which I always used to do.
So that might be a valid criticism.
Up to a point.
But my own personal observations were that it wasn't long before you didn't see any 800 kilo wheat.
Now how that fertilizer got there,
And whether this guy had to pay twice as much or how the hell he got it, I don't know.
And he probably never got the amount that the large landowner got, but he got something because he was growing better wheat, even on the small farmer in Pakistan.
Do you follow what I mean?
There was, in the irrigated area, you soon didn't see any of this.
Very poor wheat except where there was salt.
Salinity problem.
Alkalinity problem.
There, there's no use putting on fertilizer.
The responses are so poor.
That's a different problem.
But you don't have any personal recollection of the problems with the credit system.
Well, the credit system... Were you aware of that at the time?
Oh, sure.
Just like the distribution system was not what you would want.
Sometimes there would be phosphate out in the village and no nitrogen.
Generally it was the other way around, nitrogen and not enough phosphate.
And as a matter of fact, in Pakistan we got into real trouble this way because one year the organization in charge of imports
didn't order on time phosphate.
And so at planting time, in many of the villages, there was no phosphate.
So the farmers started putting on nitrogen.
And the damn wheat responded very well the first year or two.
And so then they got the impression, you don't need phosphate.
And after about
the third year of that, the yields went down dramatically.
They've depleted the phosphate.
And then the word got around the Mexican wheats are running out.
So you can get it through all kinds of things that are beyond your own control.
And then it was a battle back to change this because the
By that simple fact that there was no phosphate and many of those farmers put on nitrogen alone that year and got good responses, then the word spread to hell.
You don't need this.
All you need is nitrogen, even though we knew what was going to happen by small plot treatment.
So, you've got to go back and start extension education all over that.
Look, that's not the seed running out.
depletion of phosphate nutrient that's giving you that reduction in yield, not the seed.
So you gotta battle all of those things.
And then the word, before we ever got to this, I think that this was down at grassroots level before they saw all of this tremendous jump.
and I'm not so sure that it wasn't some vicious scientist also putting it out, that these Mexican wheat seeds were probably going to make the cattle infertile and probably the women also.
Really?
Oh, we got all kinds of this kind of stuff.
It never took on very well, but you pick it up.
Yeah.
You can pick it up around the back country.
So just superstitions from...
It may have been... Some people in India and Pakistan.
This isn't the back country of those countries.
Especially in Pakistan, this one.
I never heard of it in India.
Why would that be?
I mean, well, they just... I think it might well have been one of the scientists of the old guard that was... You know, there was fear.
For example... How about seed producers?
No, they wouldn't.
Or seed distributors?
No, I don't think it would have been to their advantage.
It would have been their disadvantage.
But all sorts of things like that.
You will recall that one of the bitterest fights that we had, also in Pakistan, was that
two very influential people, one who later became the president of one of the universities in the Sindh, said, look, not only are these wheats unsuitable for our purpose for human consumption, but the short straw will result in a shortage of feed
Keep our buffaloes and our bullocks and our cattle alive.
This is the main feed during the long dry season.
Grind it all up and feed it to them.
Bhoosa, they call the ground up straw.
B-H-O-O-S-A.
And so he would say, in open session, I had to face this once.
And the whole planning
group in the top Ministry of Agriculture.
This must have been in 1966 or 67 spring.
I can't remember which.
I say spring, February.
I was supposed to have left to go to... This may be on tape, but if it's not, it's good bits of...
information as to how change takes or doesn't take place.
Left New York and I was supposed to have met Hanson, who was then the Ford Foundation representative.
So it had to be 66 springs, I guess, after we had the 350 tons growing.
We nearly got knocked out with the poor German nation.
I had received word that it looked good.
And so I left in February, probably middle of February from New York to go to Karachi on Pan American.
Went out, the departure was eight o'clock, it started to snow about five and just one of these miserable snowstorms.
And they kept delaying the departure for an hour.
Five o'clock in the morning, they told us no flight.
By then there was that much snow.
Send us back to hotels, only there were no hotels.
There were 26 overseas flights canceled that night.
They sent us to a hotel.
There were only enough room for mothers with children and very elderly people.
The rest of us couldn't even find a place to sit down except on the floor.
I went back to the hotel, the little one, which has since disappeared, Hotel Abbey, Victoria, and I said, look, God, I gotta get some sleep, at least take a shower.
They said, we can't help you, everything's filled.
So I went back out to the airport about five o'clock in the afternoon and I got the first flight out.
I hadn't been to bed then for
This was the second night, and it was a miserable, crowded flight.
I got a center seat.
I got to Karachi.
The plane was late.
At 5.30 in the morning, there was a chauffeur from the Ford Foundation with a note, and he said, there isn't time to go to the hotel.
You go to the little halfway house here.
It's the Dutch Airlines halfway house where some of their pilots sometimes stay.
You take a shower and Hanson will pick you up at 7 o'clock.
This was 5.30.
So I got over there and got a shower.
And originally this was scheduled, the meeting of all of the research people, the minister of agriculture, the deputy, the heads of extension, the heads of soil conservation, procurement, about 30 people.
Hansen, Ford Foundation, Narvaez, my long-time colleague who was posted there then, in Mexico.
Arsvik, who was a Norwegian economist that Hansen had detached from the Harvard group and had located in the Minister of Agriculture's office.
And he used to go with us to look at all the plots.
Most of the other economists would never go out to see what was going on, but Marsvik did.
How do you spell his name?
A-R-E-S-V-I-K, A-D-V-A-R, O-D-V-A-R.
So we got to Lahore, Hanson and I, we walked in, and I really hadn't had any sleep for two days and two nights, miserable.
And they started in.
The minister turned it over to the deputy minister, who was the chairman.
And then one of these people that I was telling you about got the floor and he chewed me for 40 minutes.
He said, this is ridiculous, going into this dwarf wheat program, this Mexican wheat, he called it.
First place.
the cattle are all going to die because of the short straw and the shortage of straw.
Secondly, the wheat tastes different and they aren't going to be eaten.
And I suspect that he's the guy that put out this story about the sterility of the effect on the women and the cattle also.
And what was his name?
I would rather not use it, but he later became the
At that time, he was dean of the University of Sind.
How do you spell that?
S-I-N-D.
It's the southern province.
Oh, okay.
I know where it is.
Then he started talking about, first, the color is wrong.
We only eat white wheats.
Second, they taste different, and we will never eat them.
That previous year, they had imported or been given three million, between three and four million metric tons of PL-480 weight.
And I was, ordinarily if he started like that, if I hadn't been tired, I'd exploded.
But when he was ranting and raving for 40 minutes, I told Nacho, Hanson,
Narvaez and Arzvic were sitting across the table from me, and I told Nacho in Spanish, I said, you don't get into this.
Let me handle it, because you've got to stay here.
If they throw me out, it doesn't make any difference.
You've got to keep the thing going.
Stay out of it.
You tell Arzvic and Hansen, don't get involved, which he did.
undertone when this guy was ranting and raving.
God, he went on for 40 minutes.
And finally, I got a chance to respond and I said, Mr. So-and-so, what was your wheat production last year?
He didn't know, so I told him.
What's your consumption?
Now, the difference between what you produced and what you consumed was important, right?
Yes.
All right, let's now look at this color of grain situation.
What was the color of the grain that came here, which was the vast majority of this?
PL-480 wheat from the US.
What was the color of that grain?
He said, white.
I said, you're wrong.
It was all red.
What was the color of the grain that came from Canada, which was the second largest shipment?
He said, white.
I said, I'm sorry, Canada doesn't grow any white wheat.
It's all red.
Now, the third country that you received wheat from was Australia.
What was the color of the grain from Australia?
He said, red.
I'm sorry, it was white.
He said red and you said it was white.
I said, now will you tell me what's happened to these three and a half to four million tons of grain?
It's not piled around here.
It's disappeared into the stomachs of people.
So what's this all about?
Then he started ranting and raving about taste.
I said, well,
That's down the roadways.
We'll have to do something about that later.
That's got to be a taste panning.
But these other accusations are completely false.
And then we went on to talk to... Then it got on track and we talked about what are we going to do about... The cattle foliage, what about that?
The next year we... At the end of the dry season,
There's truth in that.
You see, this is the grains of truth.
The straw, because of the shortage close to the end of the winter, used to be worth more than the price of grain at harvest.
So it was good business to have lots of straw.
But when you fertilized, as I told him in the discussion, I said, just because they're short, you fertilize that, you plant it very thickly.
The total, and in our reports, it's published, you didn't read them.
You will get much more straw per acre than you got without fertilizing, even though they were tall, because there's few plants.
I said, those data are available.
So there's no reason for this.
But two years from then, they couldn't sell the damn straw.
There was so much of it.
And I have a picture holding it up like this, just enjoying it tremendously.
The next year, though, to show you how these things go, when we finished this meeting, I was dead.
And the minister, who had been minister of agriculture,
had then, just a few days before, become minister of, he had three portfolios, irrigation, education, and something else.
And so, he had invited us, Hansen and Arsvik and Narvaez and I over for tea after the meeting.
By the time I got over there, he's a tremendous guy, about six foot eight, very impressive person, very articulate.
He said, I hear they played pretty rough with you over there.
But he said, I hear that you gave them two for one on everything they tried to pull on you.
And there was big laughing and joking.
So we had tea and left.
But the next year, my vice got this guy maneuvered into a taste panel with the minister presiding.
They took two Mexican weeks.
This dean.
two Mexican wheats and two of the best, what were considered to be the best Pakistan wheats.
They milled them, they made the chapatis fresh.
Why not Indian wheats?
Well, they were the same.
Oh, I see, okay.
Because before partition, the main wheat research center was in Laelper, and that's where they were bred.
Yeah, okay.
But they went by,
They considered them Pakistan wheats in Pakistan and Indian wheats in India because of the bloody separation.
So, to make a long story short, they had three men on the taste panel, the deen being one of them.
And they were blinded, of course.
They gave them so many chapatis, they were coated.
The two that turned out in the top were the Mexican wheats.
No kidding.
There's no difference, but just by pure chance.
But you've got to, Jesus, it's miserable when you're trying to provoke change.
Status quo is comfortable.
Yeah, it sure is, yeah.
I mean, you've got these academicians napping at you.
Then you've got these guys trying to scuttle it out there on the front.
Yeah.
And it isn't one thing, it's one after another trying to derail it.
I think, maybe I didn't tell you, one of these people also was the head of extension.
Oh my goodness.
And that person was against it too?
But he was more discreet.
He knew that he never showed these colors in front of the minister.
But...
Narvaez and I were very close to the minister.
We could speak to him just like after we had proven what could be done.
We could speak just like we're speaking now, you and I. And finally I told him, our head of extension is paying lip service, but he's scuttling the whole thing.
He isn't backing it.
This was after the first year we could see it.
And so we had to retrain the extension people.
For example, Narvaez put on training programs how to plant these weeds in several locations, six weeks, two months before planting time.
Actually prepare the land with the bullocks the same way you do, get a good seed bed, fertilize it, and actually plant it, irrigate it.
Afterwards, you'd have to plow it up because it was out of season, but just to train them.
And there we took only the young people, the young extension people, because we knew the resistance up top because of reflecting the head of extension.
And these people became very good.
But we had to get them out away from headquarters also where this guy couldn't come out and bash their heads in.
Yeah, this is the way we got these things out.
But he was still trying to scuttle it, and so a year later I told the minister, I said, you know, Shafiq Gil, head of the extension, says the right things in your presence, but he's not behind the program.
Take him over to Mexico, see if you can do something.
So I brought him over to Mexico and had him with me in Siano for this Northwest Center for about three days on the station trying to show him the whole thing.
Then I said, now I'm going to put you in the hands of some of our best farmers from the farmers co-ops and they're going to show you production.
They'll tell you what it was like around here.
before we had the present varieties, before we fertilized, before we handled the irrigation right, before we controlled the weeds.
And you can see what it's like now.
And I want them to take you to our farmer's co-ops so you see how they're organized.
I want them to take you to the irrigation commission so you see how the water is handled.
As much as you can absorb in the rest of the week, the four days.
And I had never reason to believe these farmers would do the job.
They put on a good show for him.
He left, came back.
By the time I came back, he was acting the same damn way when I got back to Pakistan.
So I went to Narvaez.
Narvaez was complaining bitterly.
So again,
I went to see the minister, and the minister, and I said, he hasn't changed.
He said, I don't understand it.
He says, you know him well.
You've worked with him now for four or five years.
Why don't you go and talk to him alone in his office and try to find out why?
So I did.
I went and sat down.
I said, Shafi?
Why aren't you backing the program?
I said, you say the right things in the presence of the minister, but I know, I've worked with lots of people, and I can see that you're not supporting the program, at least with any vigor.
Why?
He says, look, I've worked for 25 years.
up through the bureaucracy to achieve one of the three top positions in our civil service system, one that pays more or less a decent wage.
Supposing I get involved in this program and there's a new race of rust comes out and it destroys the crop.
It's my job and my family's future, and you probably won't even be here when it happens.
I said, but Shafi, these things have been tested for six years now.
There's no zero biological risk, admittedly, but standing still is loosing ground.
There are more and more Pakistanis wanting food every year, and status quo is a loosing ballgame.
He said, yes, but I won't be blamed for that.
That's someone else's responsibility.
So then I tried to counter in another way.
I said, Shafi, you were in a position so that you should have gotten a grand part of the credit for this change that now can't be denied.
It's coming.
You can't block it.
The train is leaving, Shafiq.
It's pulled out onto the main track already, and it's starting to gain momentum.
You should have been in the locomotive waving the flag and saying, look what we've done.
The way you're acting, you're going to miss the goddamn caboose, and he did.
And he was removed.
Fortunately, he had enough years to retire at full pay.
The minister removed.
I have one good Danish friend.
He's retired now.
He used to be one of the largest farmers in Denmark, in Fleming Junker, and he was interested in all of these things as they related to the psychology of change.
And he says, you should have used my story with Shafi Hill, the head of the extension.
I said, how does that go?
He says, you used the...
symbol of the train, but he said, I put it into words.
It goes like this.
The heavy train with all the inertia, hard to get started, overloaded, trying to pull out of the siding onto the main track.
And it goes, help me, help me.
you go to hell, go to hell, go to hell as it moved down the track.
But there's a lot of truth in this.
The psychology of change and the comfort of status quo is a tremendously frightening thing.
Yeah, it certainly is.
Let's go to another criticism, and that criticism is that the Green Revolution worked against the tenant farmer.
because the owner of the land realized the profit that he could make on the land himself, and therefore kicked the tenant off the land.
What about that?
Well, I can best answer this from my experience in Mexico, where I was very close to it.
At the time, in central Mexico, in the whole Bahio, the old central part,
It was always a sharecroft situation and the thing was set there for the abuse that you were mentioning.
What thing was set there?
When the yields started going up.